Sir, I'm buried at such and such a cemetery.
No, no, no, no.
You know, when I met with you a couple of weeks ago, we really didn't get into the things that are preoccupying your attention right now.
And I wonder if briefly you could tell me the things that are really exciting you now and the things that you're working on.
Well, first and foremost would be the completion of Hans von Gretel, which has been a project.
This is the opera by Engelbert Humpedink, the original Engelbert Humpedink, which is now six years.
It started as a project for one opera company, and that opera company fell through, and the project was shelved and was revived, blah, blah.
Now, officially, it is opening.
I will be in Houston...
a little over a week from now for rehearsals.
It'll open on the 24th.
Huge project.
24th of September.
24th of October.
October, sorry.
October.
September's gone.
It's gone.
I think probably this may be... I don't want to sound like Elizabeth Schwarzkopf who gave ten farewell concerts.
Um...
But I do think it's sort of the end of my big opera career, meaning for big opera houses, big companies, it's beautiful.
The work is beautiful.
I love designing operas, but the actual schlepping is too difficult.
And so I want to devote my life hereafter, at least partially, to designing for my night kitchen, my own children's theater.
I want to design and write, put on productions.
And since they'll be small, this has to go into the aegis of children's theater, which I don't believe in any more than I believe in children's books.
But I'm stuck with the label.
I'll live with the label.
It's like a harness.
I used to resent it when I was young.
I don't anymore.
But I want to put that energy into a viable...
There are many marvelous children's theaters in America.
I just want to be among them.
And so I'm going to switch from the large monster opera making to the smaller children's theater making with my friends, my partner, Arthur Eurings, and all the people who are working with me in the theater.
That'll be my new life.
Now, where does Knight Kitchen Theater perform?
Where do we see that?
Knight Kitchen will perform.
I have an arrangement now with the Sony Corporation.
And they are opening a building in San Francisco.
Oh, good.
The fourth floor, which will be sort of like what I call personally Mowland.
That's me.
Wild Thing, Night Kitchen.
It is not at all like Disneyland.
It is an extremely original, fairly bizarre display that children will play in.
I've experimented.
We did a smaller version of this in Philadelphia at the museum in Philadelphia.
Please touch museum.
Children's Museum.
No, I'll try it again.
Children's Play Museum.
Well, they actually can come and it's a hands-on thing.
So, of course, everything is wrecked within minutes and they have to reconstruct everything.
And I built an experimental Wild Things place and Night Kitchen place and Jack and Guy place and
It was fantastic.
This is Philly, right?
This is Philly.
And probably the exhibition is still there.
And now the Sony exhibition will be primarily based on that.
So it will have some sort of cottage industry quality.
I don't want high-tech stuff.
But in return for that and my being their fourth floor, they are supporting to a large degree my children's dinner.
And, you know, the arts are dead.
Financing for the arts are dead, rather, in this country.
There is no way.
We couldn't find money, period.
This was the solution to that.
And happily, my relations with Sony are very, very good, since I am artistically in charge of everything.
Oh, that's great.
And they've let me be that.
So our new Children's Theater home will probably be in San Francisco, where the building is going up.
The Yerba Buena Theater.
The Yerba Buena.
Who would a contact be for me so I could get some information?
Let me think.
Beth Mitchell.
In San Francisco?
No, she's here at Sony in New York.
She's a wonderful person.
I'll have to get her number for you.
Or Ivan can give me... Okay, I'll ask Ivan.
Yeah.
Maybe she can fax me some stuff.
Yeah, no, she's great.
She'll do everything in her power to do that.
Anyway, thus the Children's Theater will be alive with the help of Sony.
And I've done another, doing various jobs to get money for the theater.
We're trying to get corporate help because the old kind of help is over.
You know, we used to be, me and Arthur, like death of a salesman going around with it.
I can't be a Willy Loman anymore.
I just can't ask for money from rich people.
It's a dead issue.
And if major ballet companies and theater companies are closing, you can imagine what's happening to children's theater.
You see, Bill Gates is worth $39 billion, and Ted Turner can't get him to spring something for the poor people.
It's amazing, isn't it?
It's amazing.
I don't want to think about it because it brings up all my murderers here.
So thus, my life will be largely a children's theater, and even more largely, I hope, my own work.
The books I want to do, the results of...
the Shakespeare, learning for the past few years, all the experiences I've had, both sad, tragic, and nice.
And that's how I want my life to be.
Great.
When we chatted briefly on the phone a week or so ago, you mentioned that
I'd love to pick up the spirit of that because there were some excellent things I think we were getting at.
You mentioned how Melville dreaded that in his obituary they would mention only the man who lived with cannibals.
Yeah, and he was right.
That's all they mentioned.
And I feel sorry for him, but I think I'm a little more...
as in doubt or give the determined level but maybe I'm a little more practical I have to be superior in some way I don't care if and my obituary will certainly only mention where the wild things are yes you're convinced of that oh sure I am I know human nature I know the world to a degree I just don't grudge it that it doesn't mean anything
I mean, what does an obituary mean, after all?
I'm sure mine is already written, and I'm sure that's the top line.
That's the lead, right?
And that's fine.
I mean, I know I've done more important books.
I know they're more important to me.
What's more important?
Well, I know In the Night Kitchen, to me, is a better book, simply because it was seven years later.
And I learned a lot from Where the Wild Things Are.
But each book I did...
and I don't say this egotistically, I say it frankly because I've earned it, is that each picture book after that had more substantial weight, qualities, and craftsmanship, and I learned to evolve and sort of make up a children's book.
I think outside over there is better than in the night kitchen.
I'm not talking about... I'm talking about the craft of bookmaking, whether...
People think so or not is beside the point.
But I've been able to use where the wild things are.
Much as Melville used, whether he liked it or not, Typey as his diving board to do a lot of books, it was only when they began to suspect him a lot that that diving board caved in under him.
And Typey couldn't support him anymore.
With Moby Dick, even with Marty, and certainly with Pierre,
He failed his audience because he grew into a genius.
And the 19th century was an interesting genius.
You mentioned those three books in particular, Where the Wild Things Are in the Night Kitchen, Outside Over There.
You've said in the past you consider those a trilogy.
Yes, I do.
And everyone critically doesn't know what I'm talking about.
I think they think I was trying to make it a trio so that they would all sell better.
But to me, they are a trilogy because they are the only, although earlier books like The Sign on Rosie's Door and Even Very Far Away and my first book, Kenny's Window, which is better than a lot of my later books.
But the theme is always the same.
How do children survive a moment circumstance?
How do children survive
the minute their mother's backs are turned, those few seconds where a whole experience occurs, which is imprinted forever, a hurt or a happiness or a colossal anxiety, whatever, and the mother turns, and there's no difference in the look of her child.
For the child, something has happened to the child.
I am impaled with that subject.
Wow.
And whereas the early books were sort of
I didn't know that that's what I was doing, but that's what I was doing.
But the reason why those three are a trilogy is I knew what I was doing.
By that time, I knew what I was doing.
I knew that Where the Wild Things Are is about those few moments where a happy child is totally trusting of his mother and believes that she understands why he's a pain and makes holes in the walls and screams and she tolerates him.
This day, dramatically, she doesn't.
And the shock of the collision.
The shock of the collision and the coming to the resolution that she's frightened him.
He's seen another face.
But in the end, he trusts her.
And he's right to it.
Good question.
The work, without getting into it, because you yourself don't know what will develop from your learning now, but do you expect that when the book that will develop from this Shakespeare and Keats research, would that become one of a quartet, do you think?
No.
No, my subject is finished.
So those three are discrete then?
When I said that, I was another Elizabeth Schwarzkopf statement.
When I said that, I thought it was my last picture book.
Everyone assumed I was going to go into house painting.
All I meant was that subject was finished.
That outside over there was the best manifestation, the best wrought version of the subject.
I had routed out the subject.
It had lived out its life.
There was no more to it.
And Jack and Guy, although it
It is a sub-subject, which is how the children live without parents and society.
But clearly it's on another track.
It's more contemporary, it's political, but it is no longer that subject.
I've worked it through.
That's what you're supposed to do.
And that's what I meant by them being a triptych.
Each one struggled with the subject.
In a funny way, the funniest one...
in the night kitchen is certainly the most frightening one.
Outside over there is always considered the most annoyingly puzzling one.
Like, what the hell is he talking about?
And happily, the kids knew what I was talking about.
And God knows I knew what I was talking about.
And when I was done with that, I was very happy I'd finished.
I was very happy to achieve that book.
So...
The Shakespeare key, new knowledge, new learning, new studying, will hopefully evolve a new book of another.
Perhaps it'll touch on these subjects.
I'm limited.
Thank God Henry James said he wrote the same thing over and over again.
We all do.
I did an interview with Nadine Gordimer, the Nobel Laureate, and she said that for her, writing a novel, it's like she compared it to walking into a room where there's a piece of sculpture.
And every book is like walking around and looking at the same piece from a different angle, a different perspective.
And she says, for me, it's all the same sculpture perceived from different angles.
And I think that's kind of what you're saying in a way.
Yes, the light hits a facet that you didn't notice before.
Certainly that was with The Winter's Tale for me.
Here's a question I didn't ask you.
Do you see your body of work as an oeuvre, as a corpus?
I suppose so.
Oh, that seems so grand of you.
Don't forget I did it in a kind of hustling way, young man making a living in New York.
The guiding spirit was Ursula Nordstrom, who never let me stray far from my subject, who taught me to be devoted and faithful to my subject and not be a macho pig, egotist who felt he had to cover the waterworks.
And every time I did do a book, that strayed because I felt, gee, oh, I wanted to look modern.
I wanted to look Picasso-y, Allen Ginsberg-y.
It didn't work for me.
And then I humbly had to go back to my subject.
Then it seemed humbling.
Now I thank God that I had a guide who led me back.
You know, that wonderful over-quoted statement of Jane Austen, of how she wrote on a tiny piece of ivory, what sounds humbling is not at all.
It's practical because she's such a wonderfully practical woman and full of pride.
Look, look how I filled my little piece of ivory.
Tiny, tiny piece of ivory.
How many of us can say that?
Wonderful.
Yeah.
You know, you mentioned also that you had come across a diary, a journal that you kept.
And you were really excited me with some of the things.
I was 17 and just before my 18th birthday.
And mostly I kept the diary because I so met my brother.
He was in the invasion of the Philippines.
He was in late days.
We didn't hear from him.
My brother-in-law was killed in action, so of course we lived in terror that my brother would be killed in action.
The journal was the only time I ever kept a diary.
I keep a journal now, but it's a work journal.
It's not a personal diary.
But that was very personal, and it sort of kept me going until he came home.
And it ended abruptly when we got a telegram saying, Jack is coming home.
Daniel, how old then?
I was 18.
So you kept it for about a year?
I kept it for about a year, just a little over a year, through my last year of high school.
And I wish I kept it more, and I wish I were a better journalist, because, wow, I had a big fight with Mama.
Now I'm sorry.
Gee, why didn't I tell what the fight was about?
I can't remember those things.
I didn't write a very... But the mood of it is very World War II.
The sense of my parents suffering, the Holocaust, what's happening in Europe, the dread of being drafted, that when I graduated high school I would be drafted, that I wouldn't be home when my brother came home, that I'd go in the army, that my parents would... another son would go, how could they survive?
with all the dead relatives and now their sons.
It was filled with anxiety.
It was just total anxiety.
And also, I was such a neurotic boy, and I hated school with such a passion.
I became physically ill, and every opening is, I'm sick, I'll throw up, I can't say school today.
I mentioned teachers who were wonderful to me, but who I didn't trust.
This is Warshaw, my English teacher, in order to get me to read Shakespeare.
I was intelligent, but I wouldn't read.
I wouldn't do homework.
Who can explain?
Dyslexia?
Neurosis?
Who knows?
And she had to illustrate Macbeth for her so that I would get to read it.
She knew to get me through pictures.
And I worked as hard then as I do now.
You know, I made projects for myself.
Today I am beginning The Lux of Roaring Camp by Bret Hart.
I hope to finish it in a month's time.
That's not a deadline.
And I did not socialize.
I didn't go out on dates.
I didn't do what other kids did.
I fought people off.
I mentioned phone calls from friends.
Thank God I was able to talk myself out of that one.
Why didn't I go out?
Why didn't I enjoy myself?
But did you say that you thought you saw the same person that you are today?
I am.
Except, yes, I am the same person.
I think the nervous system was all formed already.
I was a workaholic.
My parents worried about why I was indoors all the time.
These self-imposed projects, I took very seriously.
The publisher had ordered them.
I illustrated The Happy Prince by Oscar Wilde.
I illustrated The Luck of Roaring Camp by Bret Hart.
I illustrated The Opera Louise by Charpentier.
I illustrated The Match Girl by Hans Christian Andersen.
At what age is your young, your kid?
I was between 16 and 17 on all these projects.
They're not good, but they're heartfelt, especially the Bret Hart.
They're heartfelt.
And you can see the clumsy influence of Disney and the clumsy influence of movies.
And I was thinking, gee, a Renaissance kid and Michelangelo is working across the street.
My early books would have looked better.
All I had was Mickey Mouse and the movies.
So you make do with what you got.
Tell me, do you still take the afternoon nap?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
That was started with my coronary.
Oh, I love it.
I do myself, by the way.
How do you...
It's to me, and I can sleep anywhere, you know.
The only thing I can't do is sleep standing up.
Yeah, when I'm in an office meeting on 5th, they say, excuse me, can I use your floor or your couch or your tabletop?
And when I skip it, and I do sometimes, I can barely get through the evening.
Yeah.
No, I need one, and I'm blessed that I can take them on a second's notice.
Now, how about, I mean, I hate to bring up a subject, but I didn't notice any puppy, any dogs when I was there.
They're all dead.
They're all gone.
And last, but I must admit, my favorite, his name was Runga, after Philip Otto Runga, the German romantic painter.
How do you spell?
Copiously stolen from R-U-N-G-E.
Mm-hmm.
I'll check it out.
Yeah.
Outside over there is homage, that's a kind word, to Philip Otto Runge, and I named my dog after him.
And Runge is in outside over there, and he died a year and a half ago.
German Shepherd.
And I can't get over it.
Really?
Yeah.
Oh, my brother two years ago, and then a few months later, Runga.
Those are the two major support systems.
Yeah, we've got an eight-year-old lab who's diabetic.
We give her two shots a day.
She's arthritic.
And you worry about them like a child.
I know.
And that's why I'm holding off, because I'm getting to be a coward at my old age.
So I can emotionally cope as well.
See...
I took Runger to the vet to put him to sleep.
I took all my dogs.
I had four dogs here.
Each dog didn't die.
I had to take them to the vet, cradle them, watch them die, which was quite beautiful.
I was complaining.
But I vowed that the next dog I would give driving lessons to.
and he or she would drive me to the vet.
Let's point out... If I can guarantee that, I would get another dog.
You brought these dogs when they were hopelessly ill, and I think we should... Oh, yes.
Obviously.
I didn't say, well, they were healthy.
No, no, I mean, but I'm saying that... No, no, no.
Runga had cancer.
Yeah.
And the vet left it up to me to win the symptoms.
He was very, very well cared for.
Yeah.
And only on the morning when he looked disoriented...
and went out and fell over on his thigh.
That's heartbreaking, yeah.
My dog, who I still have images of running at the beach after seagulls, now she can barely hold herself up in her hind quarters.
I see that and it's so painful and you have to judge.
You know, imagine, could we do that for each other?
Yeah, well, she's not incontinent yet, so we give her the aspirin and she feels good.
Yeah, and as long as that goes, then you play it by ear.
Yeah.
One other question, and it's totally up to you.
I have to tell you how moved I was when you took me into your office and you touched that face of Keats.
By the way, Helen Vendler has a life mask of Keats.
When I told her that you have a death mask, she says, I would love to talk to him.
You will have a common point.
I can't wait to talk to her.
Yeah, and I'll set that.
When we both come back from our trips, and I'm seeing her when I come back... And I'm home on the 26th of October.
Okay, and I'll be... So I'll... She's where?
I'm sorry.
She's in Cambridge.
Cambridge.
She teaches at Harvard.
She's a full professor there, and she lives there.
I still visit her.
Why not?
I haven't been there in such a long time.
I'll be in New York in November because Hansel is coming to Juilliard Christmas.
Yeah.
I'll figure it out.
Yeah, good.
But you must, and forgive me for saying this, but you must promise to put us together when I get home.
I vow it.
Okay.
Now, one quick question.
I was so touched when you showed me that Keats mask.
Is this something I can use in this story or not?
I think not.
Okay.
It's intensely private.
My showing it to you was
How good I felt during our discussion.
Good.
Then let's just leave it there.
Yeah, I can't.
Okay.
It sounds so different when you talk about it.
I know.
I know the magic that was going on.
And he trusts me.
That little deadhead trusts me not to profit emotionally from him.
And I'm not going to do that.
Okay.
Guess what?
End of subjects.
Okay.
Okay?
You have a safe trip.
Thank you.
And we'll talk.
Okay.
Bye-bye.